# Monad Tutorials Timeline

- Source: [Hacker News](https://hnrss.org/frontpage)
- Original URL: [https://wiki.haskell.org/Monad_tutorials_timeline](https://wiki.haskell.org/Monad_tutorials_timeline)
- Published: 2026-04-30T04:28:07+00:00
- Language: en
- Images: 1

## Quick Summary

Monad tutorials timeline Appearance This is a comprehensive timeline of monad tutorials and related articles. Please update this list as it becomes outdated! If you find a tutorial, article, post, comment, or message that stands on its own as an explanation of monads, then please take a moment to p...

## Article Content

Monad tutorials timeline Appearance This is a comprehensive timeline of monad tutorials and related articles. Please update this list as it becomes outdated! If you find a tutorial, article, post, comment, or message that stands on its own as an explanation of monads, then please take a moment to paste the link somewhere on this page (register a throwaway account, if you prefer). The date, author, and blurb can be added later. This will greatly help others who are using this list as a resource for learning about monads. “All told, a monad in is just a monoid in the category of endofunctors of , with product replaced by composition of endofunctors and unit set by the identity endofunctor.” - Categories for the Working Mathematician, Saunders Mac Lane. before 2000 - 1992-02 (published date) The essence of functional programming - Philip Wadler - "This paper explores the use monads to structure functional programs. No prior knowledge of monads or category theory is required." - 1992-08 Monads for Functional Programming (pdf) - Phil Wadler, a designer of Haskell [9100 words]. - "Shall I be pure or impure?" ... "A monad is a triple (M, unit, ★) consisting of a type constructor M and two operations of the given polymorphic types." - 1995 Semantic Lego(pdf) - David Espinosa - "Denotational Semantics is a powerful framework for describing programming languages: however its descriptions lack modularity: ... Following Moggi, we build the computation ADT from composable parts, using monads and monad transformers." - 1995-05 Monadic IO in Haskell 1.3 - Andrew D. Gordon and Kevin Hammond (PDF: paper, conference proceedings) - "We describe the design and use of monadic I/O in Haskell 1.3" - 1995-09 Modular Denotational Semantics for Compiler Construction(pdf) - Sheng Liang and Paul Hudak - "Moggi first used monads and monad transformers to structure denotational semantics." - 1999-02 What the hell are Monads? - Noel Winstanley [2800 words] - "Once upon a time, people wrote their Haskell programs by sequencing together operations in an ad-hoc way." ... "For our purposes, a monad is a triple of a type and then & return operators defined over it so that the following laws apply: ..." year 2000 - 2000-01 Monads for the working Haskell Programmer - Theodore S. Norvell [4200 words, Haskell98, Gofer] - "...monads can be used to implement several other programming features including: consuming input, producing output, exceptions and exception handling, nondeterminisim." year 2002 - 2002 Yet Another Haskell Tutorial (Chapter: Monads) - Hal Daumé III - "The definition of a monad is a slightly trimmed-down version of our Computation class. The Monad class has four methods ..." year 2003 - 2003-08 All About Monads - Jeff Newbern [22600 words] (Japanese translation: モナドのすべて) - A comprehensive introduction. Covers monad transformers and some common monads. An appendix presents monads as assembly lines. - "A monad is a way to structure computations in terms of values and sequences of computations using those values." year 2004 - 2004-07 A Schemer's Introduction to Monads - Dave Herman [1700 words, Lisp, Scheme] - "The main insight of monads is that all side effects, from mutation to I/O to non-termination, have one thing in common: order of evaluation matters." ... "So monads are about talking about effects in the context of a pure semantics." - 2004-07 Monads as Containers (Russian translation) - Cale Gibbard [2900 words] - "A monad is a container type together with a few methods defined on it. Monads model different kinds of computations." ... "it is more natural sometimes to begin with map (fmap), return and join" - 2004-08 Monads in Perl - Greg Buchholz [2200 words, Perl] - "Essentially a monad is a hidden data structure (Fig. 1) which automatically passes state around for us. " year 2005 - 2005-07 Monads in Ruby - MenTaLguY - Presents monads in a friendly language, starting from Identity - "They let you chain pass [bind] operations together to make little computational pipelines, with rules of your choosing. They don’t manipulate values themselves — that’s the job of the blocks (functions) you plumb together using the monad." - 2005-11 Of monads and space suits - Eric Kow - Functions are space stations, parameters are astronauts and monads are space suits that let us safely travel from one function to another. year 2006 - 2006-03 Understanding Monads - Eric Kow - Monads as nuclear waste containers, an adaptation of monads as space suits with a new metaphor suggested by Paul Johnson - "What we need is some way to capture the pattern 'do X and then do Y, where Y may be affected by X'. Monads are the way we do this." ... "In a sense, each monad is its own little minilanguage specially suited for its particular task." - 2006-07 The Monadic Way - Andrea Rossato - A two-part tutorial. The first part shows you how build a simple evaluator, and the second part shows you how to "take the complexity" out of it by using techniques such as monad transformers - Revised 2006-09 to include Meet Bob The Monadic Lover: "what monads look like and what they are useful for, from the perspective of a ... lover." - 2006-08 You could have invented monads! (and maybe you already have) - Dan Piponi - "Writing introductions to monads seems to have developed into an industry," Dan (sigfpe) observes. He argues that monads are not "something esoteric in need of explanation", but walks you through the process of reinventing monads to solve some very basic and practical problems. - "So now I can reveal what a monad is. The triple of objects (m,unit,bind) is the monad, and to be a monad they must satisfy a bunch of laws such as the ones you've been proving." - 2009-06 Monads: Computations where order matters - Tim Sheard - 2006-10 Ask Reddit: What the hell are monads?, an answer - tmoertel [700 words] - "I think of monads as computational environments in which you get to make up the rules." ... "monads are ... a general model of computation that lets you pick and choose the environmental features that you want for your computations." - 2006-10 Monad Transformers Step by Step - Martin Grabmüller (also: updated version and associated Haskell code) - Monad transformers are rarely covered in introductory tutorials. This "is not a paper about implementing transformers, but about using them to write elegant, clean and powerful programs in Haskell". Available as a 12 page PDF or .lhs file. - 2006-11 There's a Monster in my Haskell! Andrew Pimlott - This delightful "tutorial" presents monads as monsters which devour values, use them to feed other monsters and regurgitate them when slain. - 2006-12 Maybe Monad in Java - Tony Morris - Monads can also be useful in Java! year 2007 - 2007-01 Think of a monad - Don Stewart (reposted on Eric Kow's blog) - Don integrates some pre-existing monadic metaphors, shedding light on monads in a truly comprehensive manner (illustration by Eric) - 2007-02 Understanding Monads. For Real - Karsten Wagner - A monad is like a macro - 2007-02 Crash Course in Monads Monads for Mathematicians - Vlad Patryshev - Author's Description: This crash course starts with an EASY! introduction to categories and functors, then we define a monad, then give some basic examples of monads in categories, then present monadic terminology as used in programming languages. - 2007-03 Monads in 15 Minutes - Eric Kidd - Eric boils monads down to 15 minutes, using backtracking and Maybe as motivating examples. Eric uses join , which seems quite rare for monad tutorials (cf Cale's Monads as containers) - Then I lie down in a dark room with a warm wet cloth over my eyes. - Eric boils monads down to 15 minutes, using backtracking and Maybe as motivating examples. Eric uses - 2007-08 Monads as computation - Cale Gibbard - A very straightforward presentation of monads. Notable for its "The whole point" section, which conveys why we bother with all this monad business. - 2007-08 Understanding Monads (2) - Apfelmu...

## Monetization Hook

顺便说一下，这个工具如果你想对比更多替代方案，可以去我们的每日榜单继续看。
